WIP: Private key management chapter (#48)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/private-key-management/schemes.md

---
layout: guide
title: Schemes
nav_order: 1
parent: Private key management
permalink: /guide/private-key-management/schemes/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
---

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Schemes header illustration"
   width = 1600
   height = 600
   layout = "full-width"
%}

# Private key schemes

> Bitcoin wallet-applications have until recently ranged mostly from generalist to advanced use-cases, with manual backup of recovery-phrases dominating as the private key management scheme. Few non-custodial products have targeted or been suitable for newcomers to bitcoin, the learning curve remains steep. As the community matures and grows, we should expect there to be opportunities to make more specialized wallet-applications, and improve the experience for beginners. This should also encourage a wider range of private management schemes to be employed that suits the individual product and their customers.

Author: Will add links to many of the terms once the Glossary PR is merged.

> Bitcoin wallet-applications have until recently ranged mostly from generalist to advanced use-cases, with manual backup of recovery-phrases dominating as the private key management scheme. Few non-custodial products have targeted or been suitable for newcomers to bitcoin, the learning curve remains steep. As the community matures and grows, we should expect there to be opportunities to make more specialized wallet-applications, and improve the experience for beginners. This should also encourage a wider range of private management schemes to be employed that suits the individual product and their customers.

Author: Great point. Changing.

Important aspects to consider when choosing a private key management scheme is what you expect your customers to use the wallet-application for, who they are and how much bitcoin they might store in your product. For example;

* **Target audience** - Are your customers completely new to bitcoin and its concepts, or well versed in all the technological underpinnings?
* **Use-case** - Are you building a product for frequent low value transactions, or somewhere for your customers to store their life savings?
* **Value stored** - While we always strive for no loss of funds, how critical to their financial situation would it be if your customer lost access to their funds?

The narrower you can define your answer to these questions, the easier it will be to pick the right private key management scheme, and provide a great user experience. If you find yourself wanting to target a wide range, this is a good signal to consider how you can employ a progressive scheme that grows with the customer. 

> ## Balancing security, risk and convenience

Reviewer: This is an excellent section.

The trick to picking a private key management scheme is finding the appropriate balance between convenience on the one hand, and risk of loss and redundant security on the other. While continuous improvements mean we can now enable higher security and good user experience at the same time, there is always a balance. Higher security generally means more friction and work for the user, both during setup and usage of a wallet-application. 

There are many potential threat-vectors for customers of non-custodial wallet-applications. People will be exposed differently to these vectors, and be more or less comfortable with their risk in each. 

As a simplification we can characterize the main potentials for loss of funds as;

* **Self inflicted** - you lose access to your own private key
* **Theft** - a third party gains access to your private key

> So our goal is to make it hard for your customer to lose their keys, and at the same time make it hard for a third party to get to them. 

Reviewer: You vs our, `you` is used throughout the document, so just for consistency.
```suggestion
So your goal is to make it hard for users to lose their keys, and at the same time, make it hard for a third party to get to them. 
```

Casa's [wealth security protocol]({{ 'https://github.com/Casa/wealth-security-protocol/blob/master/casa-wealth-security-protocol.pdf'}}) is good reading material for more complete views on threat vectors and risk.

## Picking a scheme for your product

Now that you have a clear picture of your use-case, target audience and risk vectors we can consider which schemes might be suitable for your product. 

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes/spectrum.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes/spectrum@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Private key management schemes, spectrum"
   caption = "The range of private key management schemes."
   width = 2084
   height = 982
   layout = "full-width"
%}

> {% include image.html

Reviewer: I love the flow.

Important aspects to consider when choosing a private key management scheme is what you expect your users to use the wallet-application for, who they are and how much bitcoin they might store in your product. For example:

* **Target audience** - Are your users completely new to bitcoin and its concepts, or well versed in all the technological underpinnings?
* **Use-case** - Are you building a product for daily payments, or a long-term life-saving storage solution?
* **Value stored** - While we always strive for no loss of funds, how critical to their financial situation would it be if your customer lost access to their funds?

The narrower you can define your answer to these questions, the easier it will be to pick the right private key management scheme, and provide a great user experience. If you find yourself wanting to target a wide range, this is a good signal to consider how you can employ a progressive scheme that grows with the customer. 

## Balancing security, risk and convenience

> The trick to picking a private key management scheme is finding the appropriate balance between convenience on the one hand, and risk of loss and redundant security on the other. While continuous improvements mean we can now enable higher security and good user experience at the same time, there is always a balance. Higher security generally means more friction and work for the user, both during setup and usage of a wallet-application. 

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by `continuous improvements`? Releasing new software updates regularly? Or that private key management schemes can change over time?

Author: Rephrased. It was a reference to learnings over the last decade.

Casa's [wealth security protocol]({{ 'https://github.com/Casa/wealth-security-protocol/blob/master/casa-wealth-security-protocol.pdf'}}){:target="_blank"} is good reading material for more complete views on threat vectors and risk.

## Picking a scheme for your product

Now that you have a clear picture of your use-case, target audience and risk vectors we can consider which schemes might be suitable for your product. 

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes/spectrum.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes/spectrum@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Private key management schemes, spectrum"
   caption = "The range of private key management schemes."
   width = 2084
   height = 982
   layout = "full-width"
%}

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes/flow-chart.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes/flow-chart@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Private key management schemes, flowchart"
   caption = "A flow-chart for picking a scheme based on use-case."
   width = 2226
   height = 1416
   layout = "full-width"
%}

> We can divide the options up into personal and shared wallet schemes. The following pages goes into more detail about each one:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can divide the options up into personal and shared wallet schemes. The following pages explain each one in more detail:
```

---
layout: guide
title: Private key schemes
description: An overview of personal and shared schemes, and how to pick one for your product depending on your use case.
nav_order: 1
parent: Private key management
permalink: /guide/private-key-management/schemes/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
image: /assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes/page-private-key-schemes.jpg
---

<!--

Editor's notes

An overview of what different private key management schemes there are, and how to choose one depending on use case.

-->

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/private-key-management/schemes-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Schemes header illustration"
   width = 1600
   height = 600
   layout = "full-width"
%}

# Private key schemes

> The private key controls the bitcoin [wallet]({{ '/guide/glossary/#wallet' | relative_url }}){:target="_blank"}, and the *scheme* is simply a way to describe the way that the key is stored and kept secure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The private key controls the bitcoin [wallet]({{ '/guide/glossary/#wallet' | relative_url }}){:target="_blank"}, and the *scheme* is simply a way to describe how the key is stored and kept secure.
```

Important aspects to consider when choosing a private key management scheme is what you expect your users to use the wallet application for, who they are and how much bitcoin they might store in your product. For example:

* **Target audience** - Are your users completely new to bitcoin and its concepts, or well versed in all the technological underpinnings?
* **Use case** - Are you building a product for daily payments, or a long-term life-saving storage solution?

> * **Value stored** - While we always strive for no loss of funds, how critical to their financial situation would it be if your customer lost access to their funds?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Value stored** - While we always strive for no loss of funds, how critical to their financial situation would it be if your user lost access to their funds?
```
User / Customer. Nitpicking for consistency.

> The narrower you can define your answer to these questions, the easier it will be to pick the right private key management scheme, and provide a great user experience. If you find yourself wanting to target a wide range, this is a good signal to consider how you can employ a progressive scheme that grows with the customer. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The narrower you can define your answer to these questions, the easier it will be to pick the right private key management scheme, and provide a great user experience. If you find yourself wanting to target a wide range, this is a good signal to consider how you can employ a progressive scheme that grows with the user. 
```

## Balancing security, risk and convenience

The trick to picking a private key management scheme is finding the appropriate balance between convenience on the one hand, and risk of loss and redundant security on the other. While learnings over the last decade mean we can now enable higher security and good user experience at the same time, there is always a balance. Higher security generally means more friction and work for the user, both during setup and usage of a wallet application. 

> There are many potential threat-vectors for customers of non-custodial wallet applications. People will be exposed differently to these vectors, and be more or less comfortable with their risk in each. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are many potential threat-vectors for users of non-custodial wallet applications. People will be exposed differently to these vectors, and be more or less comfortable with their risk in each. 
```
